When I was young,
my father wrote to me the Bible verse:
“Your word is a lamp to my foot,
and a light for my path.”
And he said: “Keep that always in mind.
Remember God’s Word and live by it.”
I was born in 1929
in the city of Võru, Estonia.
My family was religious,
and my God-fearing parents
lovingly cared for me and provided everything
that a child would need.
When my father learned the truth,
he gave each of us a Bible,
and we began to study it together.
My father was arrested in the summer of 1948.
Estonia was then under the Soviet regime,
but he was still working as a schoolteacher.
The local Department of Education
asked him to come by.
He went dressed in summer clothes
and wearing sandals,
but he never came back.
At midnight, we heard someone
banging at the door.
We opened it, and soldiers came in
and demanded our passports.
We put the passports on the table,
and they just said,
“You are under arrest.”
Pagari Prison in Tallinn
was a place everyone was afraid of,
and I was afraid too.
I remember that I was taken down the steps
to the basement to a long corridor.
There was nothing in the cell
besides a bench.
They slammed the door shut,
and that is when I became a little scared.
But then I prayed to Jehovah to help me,
and a sense of peace came over me.
I laid down on the bench and fell asleep.
I was given a ten-year prison sentence
as an enemy of the State.
A year later, we were transferred
to Russian prison camps.
Spiritual food was hard to get.
It couldn’t be sent by mail.
But the angels somehow still provided for us,
and we always had something.
Even a single verse
or a good thought can help in prison.
In any case, God’s Word
should be in our heart.
We should never forget it,
even if we can only remember one verse.
At one point during my sentence,
I was allowed
to live outside the prison camp.
One Witness family took
me and two other sisters into their home.
Living outside meant that the guard
was not watching us all the time.
We were able to spend time together,
and we could preach a little.
We even went from house to house.
Eventually, I moved to a dormitory
because there was not enough space.
And it also meant that the literature
could be stored at my place,
because if they arrested me,
it wouldn’t be a big deal,
but if the brother was arrested,
it would be much worse.
They raided my place one night.
They put all the literature on the table
and asked me where I got it.
I said, “The angels are bringing it to us
and feeding us all the time.”
So I was sentenced to another two years
for possessing literature.
Then, for the first time,
I heard that Jehovah’s Witnesses
were officially banned.
What a good feeling it was
to be recognized
as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses!
That really gave me joy.
I saw Jehovah’s help
in that things were never too hard
for me to bear.
If things were getting too difficult,
something would always change
so that I could cope.
There was always that feeling
that someone was looking after me.
I never felt alone or abandoned.
If only we could be faithful all the time,
then we would also be happy.
But sometimes we fail, and so we lose joy.
Faithfulness gives joy.
In prison, you can stay faithful
if you don’t leave Jehovah
and if you don’t forget to pray
and if you always remember why you are there.
You are there because you are
on Jehovah’s side.
I was not a thief; I was not a killer.
But I was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
and that is worth being in prison for.